In the beginning, the reason for a powerful computer was simply so that I can play the latest video game titles. And today, a part of the reason for building the current rig is still for playing games, though it is no longer the main reason.  Just like the funny scene in Dilbert - The Knack "The Curse of the Engineer", I have tinkered with electronics since youth with a screwdriver in hand. The difference between me and Dilbert would be the rate of success of repairing or actually reassembling the machine I have taken apart. Computers in particular were maybe my favorite thing to be taken apart, since it was not some kind of engineering toy but an actual piece of brilliant engineering, and still simple enough to consists of "lego block" like components. 

Our almost first family computer was an extremely cheap computer with very poor built quality, and an especially bad quality PSU. While it had warranty, the PSU we changed into were also of terrible quality, and broke down every 2 to 3 months. The PSU also leaked electricity, so you can feel a tingling seasation due to the electri field. Every time the PSU died, I was given a chance to look at the disassembled computer, so I learnt each and every hardware. The final incident that made us throw the computer away was when the PSU literally blew up and blew the fuse of the house. I don't know whether I should be thankful to this terribly broken machine that showcased its internal every 2 - 3 months, or I should be angry at its terrible build quality. Anyways, an important lesson I learned here is to never cheap out on the PSU. Anyways, RIP almost first PC. 

The first proper computer I have built during high school was something super simple since my parents still did not really trust me with building computers yet. I was given a very limited budget and scraped many parts from old computers, giving me a bit of experience in identifying 2nd hand computer parts. I used an Intel G4560, B450M motherboard, and the rest of the parts like HDD were scrapped from old broken computers. Since then, I have built several more computers, but generally these were budget builds so I had to use scrapped components. 

In 2020, after my computer, along with my room were requisitioned by my sister, I have built myself a personal rig using my own money earned during my BSc. Although the rig is nothing compared to proper national or commercial HPCs, I would say its performance is satisfactory, given my experience of using it for an entire year through my Masters in ACSE. The rig was very helpful in helping me test and benchmark computationally heavy pieces of software before actually running them on the HPC system. I am also proud that the rig was built with my hard earned money. 
